My name is Thomas Petersen, I'm a software engineer at Perset, and it is my great pleasure
to welcome the first speaker on stage.
She is Reiko Okamoto, and she's a methodologist at Brea Research Institute.
Give her a hand.
Hi everyone, just going to wait for a few people to trickle in.
Alright, so one of the most important parts of my late childhood and adolescence growing
up in Canada was reality shows on cable television.
And whether it involved 11 teams of two in a race around the world, or an up-and-coming
chef fighting against an iron chef based on a secret ingredient, I just could not get
enough of this unscripted chaos unfolding in front of me.
And during the early days of the pandemic, when I was spending a questionable amount
of time on YouTube, one day I stumbled down a recommendation of Rabbit Hole and reunited
with another show that I remembered watching growing up called Neat.
Now Neat was this dramatic makeover series that was on home and garden television in
which a professional organizer named Helen would help a person or family put cluttered
living spaces, devise solutions to better organize their lives and possessions more
effectively.
Now as someone with experience performing data analysis in both academia and the public
sector, I just could not help but to notice that many of the principles of home organization
are actually applicable to file management.
So for example, whether it's physical or digital, clutter in our space is usually clutter
in our minds as well.
And more importantly, clutter shouldn't be taking away our focus and creativity, nor
should it be blocking our way to success.
That being said, unfortunately, tips about file management can often be presented as
this mixed bag of ideas without a unifying narrative.
Or even worse, file management itself can be entirely overlooked in favor of arguably
more exciting topics like machine learning and data visualization.
So my goal over the next 15 minutes or so is to draw comparisons between home organization
and file management to better illustrate that keeping your space clean and tidy is going
to save you a lot of time down the road.
So as I was watching these clips uploaded onto YouTube, I noticed that the show often
featured a client that was struggling to declutter either their living room and dining combo
or studio apartment.
Now what was common to these spaces was that without distinct rooms separated by walls,
boundaries became blurred and as a result, it was really unclear as to where one activity
ended and another one began.
For example, I'm talking about a dining table potentially turning into a secondary office
desk.
Does that sound familiar?
Or an overflowing box of business receipts somehow sitting on a kitchen counter.
Is that familiar as well?
Not sure.
But to address this issue, the host would begin by moving existing furniture or adding
these room dividers to create dedicated spaces that were conducive to a specific activity.
So I'm talking about a space for eating and another space for working.
And I think the digital analog to this kind of clutter is a documents folder that has
just become this dumping ground for ad hoc analysis, plots, meeting minutes, and so much
more.
And we can begin to address this mess by organizing our work into self-contained projects where
each project is a folder that contains all the files relevant to a particular piece of
work.
So this involves the input data, any R scripts, and their associated results.
And furthermore, any R code that's going to be sitting in this folder, you're going
to write it as if it will be run from a fresh R session with its working directory pointed
to the project's root.
And this method of compartmentalization conveniently allows us to move our project or folder from
one location on our computer to another or onto an entirely different machine while ensuring
that the code is most likely going to work in its new location.
And I think we can further elevate this method of compartmentalization by using RStudio projects.
So if you're new to RStudio projects, when a new project is created, either in a brand
new or existing directory, RStudio creates a project file within the directory, which
is then used to store the settings that are specific to that project.
So if we ever want to return to the project after taking a small break, we can just open
up that project file.
And in the IDE, we'll see that the current working directory is set to the project directory.
The file browser is pointed at the project folder.
Any previously edited files are restored into the editor tabs.
And other RStudio settings, such as active tabs and splitter positions, are going to
be restored to exactly where they were the last time the project was closed.
And furthermore, a new R session is started.
And this aligns with our idea of self-contained projects that we discussed earlier.
And this setup makes it easier to jump back into a specific analysis after you've taken
a break from it, or to juggle multiple analyses at once without disorder.
And to tie this all back to home organization, I think it's similar to how it's a lot easier
to go from practicing the piano to cooking dinner when you have established dedicated
spaces for each activity, rather than having to move dirty laundry off of the piano or
that box of business receipts off of your kitchen counter before doing what it is that
you actually want to be doing.
And at some point in each episode on Neat, the host, Helen, often encouraged the clients
to let go of duplicates and items that they're just holding onto just in case to reduce clutter.
And understandably, on the show, some people found it challenging to let go of these sentimental
items.
You know, this could have been like a preteen refusing to part ways with their collection
of stuffed animals, or a parent going through outgrown baby clothes and really trying to
carefully choose an item from each milestone.
And I think as data analysts, we can cling on to files in a similar fashion, especially
because data analysis often involves iteration and revision to go from this initial idea
to the final deliverable.
And without a good system in place for tracking how something evolves over time, projects
can easily turn messy, as you see up here.
And to address this mess, one thing that we can do is to adopt version control.
And this gives us the option to revert selected files back to a previous state, compare changes
over time, see who modified something and when, all without having to keep every version
of the file, further reducing the amount of visual clutter that we have on our machines.
And on the show, once the unnecessary clutter was removed from the home, the host would
then set up an organizational system that was suited to the client's lifestyle and the
possessions that they held.
Specifically, when using storage bins, the host, Helen, would make it really easy to
find things in the future by leaving no doubt as to what was inside each one of these containers.
So we're talking about using transparent, clear containers or using the label printer
and printing out a label for each one of these boxes.
And in a similar fashion, I think as analysts, it's crucial for us to adopt a directory structure
that matches the type of project that we're working on.
So for an ad hoc analysis that I have on the left, that might mean creating a subfolder
for raw data, another one for the code used in the analysis, maybe another one to keep
the respective outputs.
Meanwhile, on the right-hand side, for an R package, the package development conventions
may encourage us to create a subdirectory for function definitions, another one for
unit tests, another one for vignettes, and so on.
But regardless of what kind of project we're working on, whether that's ad hoc analyses
or R package, going back to this idea of leaving no doubt as to what's inside each container,
we should always consider adding a README to the project route, which tells other people
why our project is useful, what they can do with it, and how they can use it.
And if there's a lot of content to squeeze into one README file, I think that invites
us to consider whether it's appropriate to place additional README files in the subdirectories.
And speaking from personal experience, at my previous workplace, we had a folder on
a shared drive that contained many, many, many ad hoc analyses, or many, many RMD files,
and each file was for a particular piece of ad hoc analysis.
And a colleague of mine suggested creating a lookup table, which summarized the content
of each file to make it easier to refer back to the previous analysis when needed.
So I took her suggestion, and I wrote a code snippet to automatically parse the YAML metadata
from each RMD file that was sitting in the analysis subdirectory to generate this lookup
table, which was then embedded into the README file of the analysis subdirectory.
So here, I'm sharing this reworked version of the code that I just talked about.
So this is a reworked version of the code for Cordo documents.
And I'm beginning by defining a function with the help of the Cordo packages, Cordo inspect,
to retrieve the metadata of interest for a given file.
And then I map this function that I just defined, extract metadata, to all the QMD files found
in a given directory, to generate this table that you see on the bottom, that allows me
to quickly inspect the file name, the title, and the subtitle that's sitting inside the
YAML metadata component of each Cordo document very quickly.
And if you want, you can then add this table to the README.md of a particular subdirectory
that you might want to provide more information on.
And once again, going back to the show, so once the host helped clear the clutter and
figured out what kind of organizational system was best suited to the client's lifestyle
and possessions, she further elevated the space by ensuring consistency.
And I think a great example of this is using matching hangers to reduce visual clutter
and to make a closet easier to navigate.
And this can be a little bit more difficult when you have a mix of metal and plastic hangers,
and maybe some of those hangers that you get for free from the dry cleaners.
And in the world of file management, I think this messiness resembles not having a proper
framework in place for naming our files.
But through adopting a file naming convention, we can further reduce the amount of visual
clutter on our machines and also make it easier for us to find things in the future.
And Jenny Bryan, who is also at this conference, I believe has shared some great resources
on file naming conventions.
So for the next little bit, I'm going to be drawing from her expertise, and I'll share
the three features that constitute a good file name.
First, a good file name should be machine readable.
So we're talking about avoiding special characters, avoiding spaces, and also being mindful of
case sensitivity.
And this is also that our file names can play well with our machine's inherent search functionality.
And here I'm focusing on the intentional use of underscores to allow for the easy recovery
of metadata using glob patterns or regular expressions down the road.
The second feature of a good file name is that it should be human readable.
And here I'm using hyphens to delimit words to make the file names a little bit easier
for us to read.
And I'm also focusing on using descriptive and non-generic keywords.
This is so that I can provide somewhat of a preview in terms of the content and purpose
of the file.
The third feature is that the file name should allow for the files to be arranged in a useful
way while assuming alphanumeric ordering.
So here in the top half of the slide, I'm using the ISO 8601 standard for dates when
I want my files to be arranged in chronological order.
And in the bottom half, I'm making sure to left pad the numbers with zero when I want
my scripts to be in logical order.
Or the order in which they're called in an analysis workflow.
And left padding with zero prevents situations like the number 10 written as one zero appearing
before two in a list.
Maybe you have experienced that in the past while naming files.
So we covered a lot of ground, so I think it's a good moment to recap what we've discussed.
And I hope over the past 15 minutes, I was able to convince you that by applying techniques
I shared on an home organization show, such as creating dedicated zones, reducing redundancy,
setting up customized storage solutions, and pursuing visual consistency, you can create
a serene, relaxing workspace that facilitates reproducible analysis, is inviting to other
collaborators, including your future self, and exudes professionalism.
So whether you're an instructor looking to revise their file management lesson plan,
or maybe you are someone who wants to inspire their colleagues to reconsider file management
practices in the workplace, I hope this narrative provided you with some inspiration today.
Thank you for listening, and I hope you enjoy the rest of the conference.
Thank you so much, Raiko.
So we'll have time for a few questions.
First one.
How do you encourage ongoing good file management?
One thing that I caught myself doing today, I was trying to upload a copy of this slide
to my GitHub, and I realized that the default file name for the PDF wasn't so good.
And I was really tired, because it was like 9 o'clock last night, and I was like, I'll
just leave it as is.
But then I kind of thought to myself, I should be a good role model and probably give it
a better file name.
So I think it starts by you applying and demonstrating what you are trying to convince your colleagues
in terms of making them do exactly what it is that you want them to follow.
Yeah.
Fantastic.
Another question.
So in a home, there's a need for a drawer that is messy so that everything else can
be un-messy.
Is there a similar idea for files?
Hmm.
Like a dumping ground that kind of has to be there.
Yeah, in the past, I think involuntarily, we've ended up in situations where folders
like that have existed.
But then I think you also then have to be responsible for setting up a reasonable timeline
as to when you want to go back and re-sort, delete things from that dumping ground folder
to really keep it as a temporary solution as opposed to something that is going to consistently
live within your team's workspace.
Fantastic.
Thank you so much, Raiko.
Thanks.
Thank you.